content/handbook/what/index.md, before:

---
title: What makes a Chief Delivery Officer?
description: The focus, skills and responsibilities of a CDO
layout: section.njk
jumbotron: |
  An overview of the focus, the skills and the responsibilities of a CDO, to appreciate the capabilities and characteristics that are required for organisational delivery leadership.

  Here we break down the role itself, as both a domain specialist and affecting the business as a whole, looking at what's distinctive in the client delivery portfolio from others in the C-suite.{.small}

  We also look at the essential qualities and skills of a CDO, with unusual mastery in communication and as a capable advocate for customer and team, as well as outlining seven other key skills for a CDO.{.small}
pending: false
date: 2025-03-25T13:15:21Z
updated: 2025-03-28T10:45:21Z
eleventyNavigation:
  key: What makes a CDO?
  parent: Handbook
  root: Handbook
  order: 20
listTitle: In this section
listSource: handbookWhat
listAllMoreButton: true
listItemTitle: nav
tags:
  - '#handbookPromoted'
  - '#handbookPromotedHP'
image:
  social: content/public/images/source/pexels-ketut-subiyanto-4623475.jpg
  classes:
    - margin-block-end-vlg
pagemeta:
  show: true
---

{% ImgFigure 'A man moving sticky notes. <a href="https://www.pexels.com/photo/a-man-putting-sticky-notes-4623475/" target="_blank" rel="noopener ugc">Photo</a> by <a href="https://www.pexels.com/@ketut-subiyanto/" target="_blank" rel="noopener ugc">Ketut Subiyanto</a> on Pexels.', image.classes %}
![A man moving sticky notes](/public/images/source/pexels-ketut-subiyanto-4623475.jpg){.image-rounded eleventy:widths="200,350,500,780"}
{% endImgFigure %}

This section is mostly aimed at the CDO themselves, current or aspiring, whatever title or variation of project management leadership label is given to the role:

- Chief Delivery Officer (CDO)
- Chief Service Delivery Officer (CSDO)
- Client Services Director (CSD)
- Professional Services Director (PSD), or
- Director, principal, lead, or head of a Project Management Office (PMO)

Each role name as a distinctive emphasis or indicates a slightly different focus.

Some are more commercial in direction, closer to the sales and account management end of the spectrum. Others focus more on project planning, implementation, and continuous development phases. And others will be more attentive to the live service stage, with concern for support, maintenance, and client satisfaction.

All share things in common, however, and this section explores those commonalities.

The chapter may also be useful for founders and executive teams considering adding a CDO to the organisation:

- What skills and characteristics should you be looking for when you're recruiting someone to this role?

Commit message:

CEO quote on strange but essential role

content/handbook/what/index.md, after:

---
title: What makes a Chief Delivery Officer?
description: The focus, skills and responsibilities of a CDO
layout: section.njk
jumbotron: |
  An overview of the focus, the skills and the responsibilities of a CDO, to appreciate the capabilities and characteristics that are required for organisational delivery leadership.

  Here we break down the role itself, as both a domain specialist and affecting the business as a whole, looking at what's distinctive in the client delivery portfolio from others in the C-suite.{.small}

  We also look at the essential qualities and skills of a CDO, with unusual mastery in communication and as a capable advocate for customer and team, as well as outlining seven other key skills for a CDO.{.small}
pending: false
date: 2025-03-25T13:15:21Z
updated: 2025-06-13T11:45:21Z
eleventyNavigation:
  key: What makes a CDO?
  parent: Handbook
  root: Handbook
  order: 20
listTitle: In this section
listSource: handbookWhat
listAllMoreButton: true
listItemTitle: nav
tags:
  - '#handbookPromoted'
  - '#handbookPromotedHP'
image:
  social: content/public/images/source/pexels-ketut-subiyanto-4623475.jpg
  classes:
    - margin-block-end-vlg
pagemeta:
  show: true
---

{% ImgFigure 'A man moving sticky notes. <a href="https://www.pexels.com/photo/a-man-putting-sticky-notes-4623475/" target="_blank" rel="noopener ugc">Photo</a> by <a href="https://www.pexels.com/@ketut-subiyanto/" target="_blank" rel="noopener ugc">Ketut Subiyanto</a> on Pexels.', image.classes %}
![A man moving sticky notes](/public/images/source/pexels-ketut-subiyanto-4623475.jpg){.image-rounded eleventy:widths="200,350,500,780"}
{% endImgFigure %}

This section is mostly aimed at the CDO themselves, current or aspiring, whatever title or variation of project management leadership label is given to the role:

- Chief Delivery Officer (CDO)
- Chief Service Delivery Officer (CSDO)
- Client Services Director (CSD)
- Professional Services Director (PSD), or
- Director, principal, lead, or head of a Project Management Office (PMO)

Each role name as a distinctive emphasis or indicates a slightly different focus.

Some are more commercial in direction, closer to the sales and account management end of the spectrum. Others focus more on project planning, implementation, and continuous development phases. And others will be more attentive to the live service stage, with concern for support, maintenance, and client satisfaction.

All share things in common, however, and this section explores those commonalities.

The chapter may also be useful for founders and executive teams considering adding a CDO to the organisation:

- What skills and characteristics should you be looking for when you're recruiting someone to this role?

CEOs of professional services businesses understand that the delivery principal sits at the heart of the business, and close to those responsible for the commercial leadership.

> When the company grows, consistency becomes more important and, counterintuitively, being systematic creates space for a flow and a rhythm.{.large}
>
> *[Jake Goldman](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jacobgoldman/){target=_blank rel="noreferrer nofollow noopener"}, president and founder, [10up](https://10up.com/){target=_blank rel="noreferrer noopener"}/[Fueled](https://fueled.com/){target=_blank rel="noreferrer noopener"}*
{.content-canvas-item-wide-left .content-canvas-item-left--span-2 .bq-alt-2}

It is a vital position with an overview of outcomes for customers, setting and maintaining the processes and practices of client delivery, providing a safe space for creativity, and a place in which expertise can shine.{.content-canvas-item-right}

They recognise the role of CDO is a strange one though, serving the needs of the customer, the team, and the business simultaneously in creative tension.{.content-canvas-item-right}

The skill set needed is different according to business needs, but there are some fundamental soft skills:

- High EQ
- Strong communication skills
- Diplomacy
- Strong organisational skills
- Outcome oriented
- Process driven
- Forecasting and capacity management
- Knowledge and skills sharing
- Strong sense of team — we’re doing this together
- Set standards, and hold people accountable to them

This chapter covers all these and more.
