content/handbook/strategy/index.md, before:

---
title: Building a delivery strategy amidst Business-as-Usual
description: Thinking and acting for the now and the not yet, so the future is better than the past
layout: section.njk
jumbotron: |
  With active client delivery projects demanding your time and attention, how can you construct a delivery strategy that's fit for purpose?

  And how do you pick up an existing delivery strategy, work out what's working and what isn't, and make improvements that stick?
pending: false
date: 2025-03-24T14:54:03Z
updated: 2025-06-24T17:52:29Z
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Building a delivery strategy
  parent: Handbook
  root: Handbook
  order: 30
listTitle: In this section
listSource: handbookStrategy
listAllMoreButton: true
listItemTitle: nav
tags:
  - '#handbookPromoted'
image:
  social: content/public/images/source/pexels-rdne-7888728.jpg
  classes:
    - margin-block-end-vlg
pagemeta:
  show: true
---

{% ImgFigure 'Woman drinking from a ceramic mug. <a href="https://www.pexels.com/photo/woman-drinking-on-ceramic-mug-7888728/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Photo</a> by <a href="https://www.pexels.com/@rdne/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">RDNE</a> on Pexels.', image.classes %}
![Woman drinking from a ceramic mug](/public/images/source/pexels-rdne-7888728.jpg){.image-rounded eleventy:widths="200,350,500,780"}
{% endImgFigure %}

This chapter takes seriously the problem of business-as-usual (BAU) and what the delivery landscape looks like on the first day the CDO arrives.

We begin by sketching out that environment and how to go about understanding who is making delivery decisions, how and why they are being made that way, and ways of engaging with and unpicking the history into which you're walking.

We'll take a look at the sort of things you should be considering in your first 30 and first 100 days. To do that, we'll go into some more depth on a few things you'll need to do from the start that we've outlined already as the [key skills of a CDO](/handbook/what/important-skills/), things like building relationships and establishing your credibility.

The chapter then advocates for a two-pronged approach to building out your approach in the business built on a thoroughgoing understanding of the [relationship between a strategic vision and a tactical view](/handbook/what/important-skills/#strategic-vision-tactical-view) that we've described a little in the previous chapter.

**Strategy:**{.h4-style} walking up the hill to see the horizon
**Tactics:**{.h4-style} doing the ground work at ground level
{.padding-inline-start-vlg}

We'll round things out with some practical steps to join things up in the midst of BAU.

Commit message:

Updates to support images on posts a bit better

content/handbook/strategy/index.md, after:

---
title: Building a delivery strategy amidst Business-as-Usual
description: Thinking and acting for the now and the not yet, so the future is better than the past
layout: section.njk
jumbotron: |
  With active client delivery projects demanding your time and attention, how can you construct a delivery strategy that's fit for purpose?

  And how do you pick up an existing delivery strategy, work out what's working and what isn't, and make improvements that stick?
pending: false
date: 2025-03-24T14:54:03Z
updated: 2025-06-24T17:52:29Z
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Building a delivery strategy
  parent: Handbook
  root: Handbook
  order: 30
listTitle: In this section
listSource: handbookStrategy
listAllMoreButton: true
listItemTitle: nav
tags:
  - '#handbookPromoted'
image:
  social: content/public/images/source/pexels-rdne-7888728.jpg
  classes:
    - margin-block-end-vlg
  path: /public/images/source/pexels-rdne-7888728.jpg
  alt: Woman drinking from a ceramic mug
  caption: 'Woman drinking from a ceramic mug. <a href="https://www.pexels.com/photo/woman-drinking-on-ceramic-mug-7888728/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Photo</a> by <a href="https://www.pexels.com/@rdne/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">RDNE</a> on Pexels.'
  beforeJT: false
pagemeta:
  show: true
---

This chapter takes seriously the problem of business-as-usual (BAU) and what the delivery landscape looks like on the first day the CDO arrives.

We begin by sketching out that environment and how to go about understanding who is making delivery decisions, how and why they are being made that way, and ways of engaging with and unpicking the history into which you're walking.

We'll take a look at the sort of things you should be considering in your first 30 and first 100 days. To do that, we'll go into some more depth on a few things you'll need to do from the start that we've outlined already as the [key skills of a CDO](/handbook/what/important-skills/), things like building relationships and establishing your credibility.

The chapter then advocates for a two-pronged approach to building out your approach in the business built on a thoroughgoing understanding of the [relationship between a strategic vision and a tactical view](/handbook/what/important-skills/#strategic-vision-tactical-view) that we've described a little in the previous chapter.

**Strategy:**{.h4-style} walking up the hill to see the horizon
**Tactics:**{.h4-style} doing the ground work at ground level
{.padding-inline-start-vlg}

We'll round things out with some practical steps to join things up in the midst of BAU.
