content/deliver/index.md, before:

---
title: We deliver
layout: section.njk
type: page
date: 2025-03-21T15:29:44Z
jumbotron: |
  Your business is growing and really taking off, but keeping customers happy as you scale up is an unexpected challenge.{.bold}

  And it's starting to threaten the health and growth of the company, affecting your passion as a founder.{.smaller .emphasis}
pagination:
  data: collections.servicePromoted
  size: 6
  alias: items
  generatePageOnEmptyData: true
listAllDescriptions: true
listAllMoreButton: true
showNav: false
indexListType: simple
redirect_from:
  - /delivery/
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Delivery
  parent: Home
---

There's four ways that I help founders and CEOs of ambitious businesses to tame the chaos and rekindle the fire.

- Delivery leadership as a [fractional Chief Delivery Officer (CDO)](/deliver/fractional/)
- Practical support for [project or service delivery teams](/deliver/project-delivery/)
- Consultancy for [delivery strategy design](/deliver/strategy-design/) to solve problems fast
- Standards and metrics for [effective governance and control](/deliver/governance-control/) of critical projects

Commit message:

title and description for contact and deliver pages

content/deliver/index.md, after:

---
title: We deliver
description: Four ways that I help founders and CEOs of ambitious businesses to tame the chaos and rekindle the fire
layout: section.njk
type: page
date: 2025-03-21T15:29:44Z
jumbotron: |
  Your business is growing and really taking off, but keeping customers happy as you scale up is an unexpected challenge.{.bold}

  And it's starting to threaten the health and growth of the company, affecting your passion as a founder.{.smaller .emphasis}
pagination:
  data: collections.servicePromoted
  size: 6
  alias: items
  generatePageOnEmptyData: true
listAllDescriptions: true
listAllMoreButton: true
showNav: false
indexListType: simple
redirect_from:
  - /delivery/
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Delivery
  parent: Home
meta:
  title: We deliver
  description: Four ways that I help founders and CEOs of ambitious businesses to tame the chaos and rekindle the fire
---

There's four ways that I help founders and CEOs of ambitious businesses to tame the chaos and rekindle the fire.

- Delivery leadership as a [fractional Chief Delivery Officer (CDO)](/deliver/fractional/)
- Practical support for [project or service delivery teams](/deliver/project-delivery/)
- Consultancy for [delivery strategy design](/deliver/strategy-design/) to solve problems fast
- Standards and metrics for [effective governance and control](/deliver/governance-control/) of critical projects
