content/handbook/why/index.md, before:

---
title: Why does an organisation need a Chief Delivery Officer?
description: End-to-end quality, efficiency, and customer satisfaction from the heart of the business outwards
layout: section.njk
jumbotron: |
  Why does a business need a Chief Delivery Officer or Client Services Director? They'll add costs and disrupt the organisation, and the business got along fine without one, right?
  
  So why might you need one?
pending: true
date: 2024-12-04
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Why organisations need a CDO
  parent: Handbook
  root: Handbook
  order: 10
tags:
  - '#handbookPromoted'
---

Consectetur duis enim cillum adipiscing non. Enim cillum, adipiscing non. Non mollit laboris, exercitation. Exercitation et mollit eu velit cupidatat cillum ut. Mollit eu velit cupidatat. Velit, cupidatat cillum ut sit sunt voluptate.

Duis enim, cillum adipiscing non. Adipiscing non mollit laboris exercitation et. Mollit laboris exercitation et. Exercitation et mollit eu velit cupidatat cillum ut. Mollit eu velit cupidatat. Velit, cupidatat cillum ut sit sunt voluptate. Ut sit, sunt voluptate.

Commit message:

Skeleton handbook pages in the 'Why' section

content/handbook/why/index.md, after:

---
title: Why does an organisation need a Chief Delivery Officer?
description: End-to-end quality, efficiency, and customer satisfaction from the heart of the business outwards
layout: section.njk
jumbotron: |
  Why does a business need a Chief Delivery Officer (CDO) or Client Services Director (CSD)? They'll add costs and disrupt the organisation, and the business got along fine without one, right?
  
  So why might you need one?
date: 2024-12-04
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Why organisations need a CDO
  parent: Handbook
  root: Handbook
  order: 10
tags:
  - '#handbookPromoted'
---

In this section, we look at the need for a chief of delivery from all perspectives — the CDO themselves, the delivery team within the organisation, the c-suite or executive team colleagues in the business, the founder(s)/owner(s) of the company, the clients and customers of the business, the personnel team and recruiters, and more. That means that the 'you' in the question above is definitely you, whichever role you have or perspective from which you're looking.

In the question above there's a presumption of success — that the Chief Delivery Officer will bring rigour and performance to your client delivery processes and practices, seeing improvements in project or service delivery and triumphs across the board. But not all CDOs are successful, or aren't able to be, so we'll also look at the reasons why client delivery leadership can falter and what could be going on in those situations.

This section will also cover how you can get the best our of your CDO — what do you actually do when you have a Chief Delivery Officer on Client Services Director on board?

And finally we'll take a view of things through the lens of metrics — how to understand the impact that your CDO is making to the business.

With all those questions covered that should put us in a strong position to understanding why your organisation needs a Client Services Director or Chief Delivery Officer. Excellent.{.margin-block-vlg .padding-block-start-vlg}
