content/handbook/why/you-need-a-cdo.md, before:

---
title: Why an organisation needs a Chief Delivery Officer
description: A CDO brings the integration between vision, strategy, and execution that you need to excel.
layout: page.njk
date: 2024-12-16T12:00:00Z
pending: false
jumbotron: |
  Whether you're a services business or a product company, you need to deliver work for your clients. Often it's the part of the business that your clients experience most closely and, done well, is a foundation stone for your reputation.
  
  Consequently, delivery touches every part of your organisation. A CDO brings the integration between vision, strategy, and execution that you need to excel.
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Why you need a CDO
  parent: Why organisations need a CDO
  root: Handbook
  order: 10
tags:
  - '#handbookWhy'
metadata:
  show: true
---

*H*{.drop-first}iring a CDO at the right level will be a big investment for the business. The person themselves will have costs, and they will likely also bring a team with them, maybe a mixture of internal and external people. There will be disruption to business-as-usual and a reduction in velocity whilst change is happening that itself will incur costs.

*So why do it?*

The business has been getting along fine so far. Why create the headache?

It's likely that some of the capabilities and skills for delivery already exist within the team, with scrum masters and delivery managers overseeing projects, and technical architects or senior designers who lead aspects of work and can deputise for delivering projects if needs be. Larger organisations may even have people in fairly senior roles, as a delivery lead or principal with responsibility for multiple projects simultaneously.

However, there may also be some core capabilities that are missing from the delivery office, or are subsumed under departments or aspects of the business and not properly devolved to the delivery office. A CDO who is given the task of bringing coherence, consistency, and high performance in delivering successfully for clients may also with to recruit for specific skills.

It's worth reflecting here, though — *did the business actually get along just fine before the Chief Delivery Officer?*

There's at least two answers to that question.

Firstly, of course they did — they wouldn’t be in business otherwise.

However, secondly, it quite likely that the business hasn't actually been doing that well, struggling in one or more aspects of delivering for clients, without acknowledging it or really understanding why. Sometimes, it's obvious that something's not working — stressed staff, unhappy clients, missed deadlines, etc. Sometimes, it's only through interpreting secondary symptoms that you realise there's a problem — the business feels like it's hit a ceiling of growth that it just can't push through, say. Sometimes, it's just a sense that the founder(s) or CEO has that things could be better.

## Delivery, Governance, Strategy

Projects need people to manage them. Work for clients needs people to be responsible for making sure it gets delivered, making sure the right people are doing the right things at the right time in the right way, with the resources and tools they need to get it done, with problems identified and risks raised and all handled appropriately to keep things on track and to get things to the destination as planned.

Project managers, delivery managers, team leads — all very straightforward and obvious roles, and it makes sense to hire as many project and/or delivery managers as you need, trained and empowered, to keep the show on the road.

As a first impression, this is a fairly compelling way to address issues with delivering services for clients. The more clients and the more projects you have, the more people you hire to cover all the things. It's a fairly simple logic.

Project management and delivery skills are important, and it's vital to have skilled and capable people in these roles so that your clients and customers get the quality of work they expect. But this approach to scaling is brittle and will inevitably come unstuck.

### More than delivery

There's two dimensions here where more is required, one that is mostly outward-facing, one looking more inwards. For the first, for client work to be and remain healthy it needs more than project management. With the second, for the business itself to improve and grow it needs more than people delivering (more) stuff. The broad labels for each of these two aspects are 'governance' and 'strategy'.

#### Governance:

Both client projects and healthy customer relationships depend on good governance, including things like:

- oversight of what's been done and what's going to be happening, and why, to support effective decision-making
- ensuring that tasks and outcomes are *and remain* aligned with user needs and business objectives, and negotiating effectively to keep expectations on track
- tracking and monitoring project quality and performance metrics based on milestones, spend, and resources, with a particular focus on budgets and revenue
- accurate projections and project forecasts that pinpoint risks and other discrepancies, and enable actions to be taken
- identifying opportunities to achieve benefits, reduce risks, make savings, or seize new or unexplored possibilities or areas for growth

… and so on.

#### Strategy:

As the business grows in its capabilities and its size, the capacity for delivery needs to increase as well, which means a focus on:

- a high-performance customer experience based in a coherent client services vision with effective processes
- identifying problems and opportunities for improvements in service delivery, practices, skills and learning, processes, and automations
- monitoring revenue and spend with clear and timely projections that enable effective capacity planning and a smart recruitment strategy
- tools, tool kits, processes and practices with playbooks, guides, help cards, templates and more that facilitates healthy growth and organisational development
- motivating and empowering teams to perform at their best, fostering a positive and inclusive culture aligned with the company’s values, with helpful coaching, mentoring and feedback
- wise approaches to innovations and new technologies, embracing change and hungry to improve whilst wary of hype and bubbles that quickly burst

… and so on.

<!-- ## The Value of a CDO

Something else -->

Commit message:

Why … the value of a CDO

content/handbook/why/you-need-a-cdo.md, after:

---
title: Why an organisation needs a Chief Delivery Officer
description: A CDO brings the integration between vision, strategy, and execution that you need to excel.
layout: page.njk
# date: 2025-01-10T12:00:00Z
pending: false
jumbotron: |
  Whether you're a services business or a product company, you need to deliver work for your clients. Often it's the part of the business that your clients experience most closely and, done well, is a foundation stone for your reputation.
  
  Consequently, delivery touches every part of your organisation. A CDO brings the integration between vision, strategy, and execution that you need to excel.
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Why you need a CDO
  parent: Why organisations need a CDO
  root: Handbook
  order: 10
tags:
  - '#handbookWhy'
metadata:
  show: true
---

*H*{.drop-first}iring a CDO at the right level will be a big investment for the business. The person themselves will have costs, and they will likely also bring a team with them, maybe a mixture of internal and external people. There will be disruption to business-as-usual and a reduction in velocity whilst change is happening that itself will incur costs.

*So why do it?*

The business has been getting along fine so far. Why create the headache?

It's likely that some of the capabilities and skills for delivery already exist within the team, with scrum masters and delivery managers overseeing projects, and technical architects or senior designers who lead aspects of work and can deputise for delivering projects if needs be. Larger organisations may even have people in fairly senior roles, as a delivery lead or principal with responsibility for multiple projects simultaneously.

However, there may also be some core capabilities that are missing from the delivery office, or are subsumed under departments or aspects of the business and not properly devolved to the delivery office. A CDO who is given the task of bringing coherence, consistency, and high performance in delivering successfully for clients may also with to recruit for specific skills.

It's worth reflecting here, though — *did the business actually get along just fine before the Chief Delivery Officer?*

There's at least two answers to that question.

Firstly, of course they did — they wouldn’t be in business otherwise.

However, secondly, it quite likely that the business hasn't actually been doing that well, struggling in one or more aspects of delivering for clients, without acknowledging it or really understanding why. Sometimes, it's obvious that something's not working — stressed staff, unhappy clients, missed deadlines, etc. Sometimes, it's only through interpreting secondary symptoms that you realise there's a problem — the business feels like it's hit a ceiling of growth that it just can't push through, say. Sometimes, it's just a sense that the founder(s) or CEO has that things could be better.

## Delivery, Governance, Strategy

Projects need people to manage them. Work for clients needs people to be responsible for making sure it gets delivered, making sure the right people are doing the right things at the right time in the right way, with the resources and tools they need to get it done, with problems identified and risks raised and all handled appropriately to keep things on track and to get things to the destination as planned.

Project managers, delivery managers, team leads — all very straightforward and obvious roles, and it makes sense to hire as many project and/or delivery managers as you need, trained and empowered, to keep the show on the road.

As a first impression, this is a fairly compelling way to address issues with delivering services for clients. The more clients and the more projects you have, the more people you hire to cover all the things. It's a fairly simple logic.

Project management and delivery skills are important, and it's vital to have skilled and capable people in these roles so that your clients and customers get the quality of work they expect. But this approach to scaling is brittle and will inevitably come unstuck.

### More than delivery

There's two dimensions here where more is required, one that is mostly outward-facing, one looking more inwards. For the first, for client work to be and remain healthy it needs more than project management. With the second, for the business itself to improve and grow it needs more than people delivering (more) stuff. The broad labels for each of these two aspects are 'governance' and 'strategy'.

#### Governance:

Both client projects and healthy customer relationships depend on good governance, including things like:

- oversight of what's been done and what's going to be happening, and why, to support effective decision-making
- ensuring that tasks and outcomes are *and remain* aligned with user needs and business objectives, and negotiating effectively to keep expectations on track
- tracking and monitoring project quality and performance metrics based on milestones, spend, and resources, with a particular focus on budgets and revenue
- accurate projections and project forecasts that pinpoint risks and other discrepancies, and enable actions to be taken
- identifying opportunities to achieve benefits, reduce risks, make savings, or seize new or unexplored possibilities or areas for growth

… and so on.

#### Strategy:

As the business grows in its capabilities and its size, the capacity for delivery needs to increase as well, which means a focus on:

- a high-performance customer experience based in a coherent client services vision with effective processes
- identifying problems and opportunities for improvements in service delivery, practices, skills and learning, processes, and automations
- monitoring revenue and spend with clear and timely projections that enable effective capacity planning and a smart recruitment strategy
- data, planning and activity for everything from supporting individual bids to expansion into new markets, sectors and technologies
- tools, tool kits, processes and practices with playbooks, guides, help cards, templates and more that facilitates healthy growth and organisational development
- motivating and empowering teams to perform at their best, fostering a positive and inclusive culture aligned with the company’s values, with helpful coaching, mentoring and feedback
- wise approaches to innovations and new technologies, embracing change and hungry to improve whilst wary of hype and bubbles that quickly burst

… and so on.

## The Value of a CDO

All together, a Chief Delivery Officer brings a whole-organisation and cross-functional perspective to what the business does for its customers — the CDO will bring an essential unifying view to things in the business that are often otherwise disconnected, joining together marketing with relationship management, design with finance with sales, engineering with HR, and so on.

This should probably be understood under the umbrella of culture shift: it will likely demand that the organisation thinks differently and acts differently.

Although the CDO will have a large individual impact, one person alone will not be able to bring about the changes needed to get the best outcomes for the organisation. Even a team, small or large, will likely be overawed by the scale of the task to bring coherence to customer delivery, giving it the important and central place in the company's focus. Only when the whole business works together with the CDO and their team will the task be achievable.
